This is an interview with Mary Miller. The date is
April 11th, 1985. What is your maiden name and your
entire name, please?
And
how old were you during the years of 1940 to 1945?
And where were you in those same years, 1940, 1945?
I was in Marseille
part of the time, and then we moved to Nice. How long
after France fell to the Nazis in 1940 was it before
you became involved with the resistance? Well,
I wasn't really involved very much with the
resistance, but you might say that around 1943 we
had a closer encounter. And what was this? Well, my
brother and myself were living in a hotel very
close to the Germans where the Gestapo was
located. And the resistance was all around us. We
were very much aware of what was going on, but I
didn't actually participate in it, but my brother
did. Okay. Did any of the roles that you had during
that time, 1940, 1945, change as you went along?
You said you were very close to all of what was going
on in the resistance in Nice. Did you know about
heads of resistance, people that were in the
resistance? Do you know any names of people in that
area that were in the resistance?
Jean Médecin were very much in charge of the
resistance and there were a lot of professors
throughout these days in town and we didn't have
any particular names that we could mention but we
knew that all these people were working for the
resistance. Everybody who was interested in
getting rid of the Germans was involved in the
resistance
while
then occupying my mother's hotel at that time in
1943. Did you ever talk with the rest of your family
about what they did in the resistance, what close
friends or other family members did in the
resistance?
uh in one way we were trying to resist which was more
or less an intellectual approach to it some of my
teachers were writing poetry and literature and
this was distributed throughout the city it was
most of the time poking fun at the germans and
trying to bring hope to the to the people about
better days. And it was sort of underground kind of
literature, but it was very necessary for the
morale of the people. So this was one way that we
were showing that we still had a little bit of hope
and pride, and we weren't really losing the war. We
were just temporarily
You said you used a lot of literature and stuff. Was
that ever used as a mode for a code for delivering
messages or anything that you know of?
There were messages that were delivered every
day, and you could hear them on the radio in the
morning. Even though it was jammed by the Germans,
you could hear the radio messages going out. You
said your brother did some stuff. Did you do any
particular things before you ended up going to the
boarding school?
But the one thing we did, my mother and myself and my
brother, was to hide the Jewish people who were
being persecuted by the Germans. So in that sense
we were doing a little bit of work for the
non-citizens. But it wasn't very much of a tragedy
to have
from one day to the next, they could disappear, and
they put in the trucks that were taking off for
Auschwitz. And so we brought food to them, we hid
them in the cellars, and we brought food to them,
and we could have been in trouble had we been found
out by the Germans, because it was a very serious
matter.
Did you have special codes among each other when
you hid these people, the Jews? Did you have
special ways that you could know that somebody
else was sensitive to that? So
did you have a code name in particular?
Did anyone in your family?
No. Okay. Did you know that D-Day was coming at all?
like Nice was so close to the Italian border and so
much in the south of France that they were never
going to arrive, although we could hear on the
radio every day the progress that they were making
in the north and the central part of France, how
they were becoming liberated. But Nice always
seemed to be so far away, and we kept waiting. And
the underground had been advised by the Allies,
not to do anything to liberate the city, to wait for
the Americans. But they finally got grown, became
very desperate, and they decided to take matters
in their own hands. And the young people of the
underground are the ones who actually liberated
these. And when the Americans arrived, it had
already been liberated. Did you participate in
this?
Did you know of any specific incidences that
friends of yours maybe participated in? Well,
no, I didn't. Not really. Okay. But they were
really told not to do anything about liberating
the town. Okay. Were you aware of all the jobs that
the resistance was doing, the intelligence, the
transportation, what you helped with, hiding the
Jews and moving them? Were you aware of all that was
going on?
We had, very close to our hotel, there was a house
where the Gestapo used and the Nazis used to gather
the Jewish people before they were put in the
trucks and sent out to the railroad stations. sent
to Auschwitz and these poor people were gathered
in this one place and it was awful because you could
hear them singing to keep courage and you could
sometimes hear children crying and it was just a
tragedy and we were all aware of what was going on
and it was difficult, you know.
Yeah. Were you aware of the ongoing arrests and
execution of resistance members? I know you said
you didn't do a lot, but y'all did hide the Jews, and
that was, as you've already hinted at, punishable
by the Germans. Were you aware of all the arrests
and executions that were going on? And if so, how
did you handle your own danger or your family's
danger?
and we didn't worry about the tension. We did know
that they were, we couldn't even speak very, you
know, outside because there were Nazi Gestapos
all around that were wearing civilian clothes,
and we were extremely cautious. But they made
certainly no bones about what they would do to
anybody if they actually caught them doing
something. As a matter of fact, the most awful
experience that we had, my brother and I, was
walking down the main street and watching those
two young men being hung in the pillars of the main
street because they had been discovered to do
underground work. And it was a terrible tragedy to
see I
can imagine. Did you, any member of your families,
or anyone that you know, have, oh, I guess you could
call them psychiatric problems during or after
World War II, such as nervous breakdowns or
continuous nightmares?
were involved with the Germans. Some of the
prostitutes, say, and some of the people who
collaborated with the Germans had been all
observed by the people of Nice, and they were
punished. What they did is they loaded them up and
put them in a... Well, first of all, they grabbed
them and shaved their heads completely. And women
were completely bald. And then they marked them in
some way, and they put them in those large trucks,
and they paraded them all through the city of Nice.
So you can imagine that must have made a terrible
effect on these people, and they probably
Yeah, I would imagine. You've already mentioned
the house that was close to the hotel you were in
that they put the Jews in before they went off to the
concentration camps. Were there any specific
raids where the Nazis actually gathered up the
people that you knew? Well,
yes. As a matter of fact, one day on my birthday, I
went next door to borrow a record carrier I didn't
even know that, you know, I didn't even think that
it was Jewish. I was just going to go, a record
player. And when I walked in there with my friend, I
realized that the gate was open to the garden. So we
walked through there, and then we went to the front
door, and we rang the bell, thinking my friend was
going to answer it. But the Gestapo answered the
door. And we started moving away, but they
insisted that we come in. So this friend and myself
walked in there, a little bit shaky, not knowing
what was going to happen to us. And then they put us
in a room because they didn't speak any French. And
then they said that we should sit still and wait for
the officer who spoke French to come over and talk
to us. And we sat there, my friend and I, a little bit
scared. for about 15 minutes, and finally this
officer came with a great stature and started
asking us if we were Jewish. And we said no, we
weren't Jewish. We were just friends and people.
And so he took us over into the living room, and this
German man started slapping the Jewish man who was
sitting in an armchair. and he had already been
abused and he was in terrible shape and this German
officer pointed out to the Jewish bread and the
Jewish wine and the Jewish business Jewish that
telling us that everything in this house was
Jewish and this one was Jewish and were we Jewish we
kept saying no we weren't Jewish and they said,
okay, they took my friend who was a male and they
said, go and check him, take his clothes off and see
whether he's been circumcised. Because I guess in
those days, you know, it was proof that they needed
to be circumcised. And so, after a while, they put
us back into the room and we kept waiting to know
what was going to happen to us. We said, can we
please go back to my house and they said well we let
you go back but under one condition and it is that
you say nothing nothing to anybody that we're here
so we were finally released and we went back to the
hotel and that was the end of that we were very
scared and everybody thought we had been on some
jump somewhere but
His son, who fortunately had gone to a football
game, escaped because the neighbors, as soon as he
came home, advised him that the Gestapo was in his
home. And he was sheltered in the neighbor's home,
another neighbor of mine. And he was given some
clothes, and he was sent to another city, and he
changed his name. But I think that a few months
later, we didn't hear from him anymore. Did you
ever find out what happened to your friend? No,
we
didn't because he had sent us a couple of letters
when he first arrived to Lyon, the other city that
he went to, and as I say, changed his name, and we
received two letters.
I read quite a bit about the French police
sometimes even seem to be aiding the Nazis. Were
you ever questioned or harassed by the French
police? Did it ever seem to you that they were
trying to help the Nazis, maybe not by choice, but
out of situation, they had to comply with what the
Nazis were telling them? Did anyone ever seem to go
against that? Did they get upset with that? Oh,
yes, of course they did. But, you know, you had to
play your part, right? You had to walk the middle of
the road. You had to be very
careful.
You've already said you were questioned. Were any
other members of your family ever questioned,
maybe your mother or your brother?
and that we were collaborating and we were
playing, you know, and they even threatened to
confiscate the radio from us because it was
against their courage to try and find out what was
really happening. And we kept saying, oh, no, we
don't listen to the BBC. But one day we got tired of
that. We said, OK, we're listening to the BBC. And
you may as well hear that the war is being lost by you
and that the Americans are coming to liberate us.
And they were very shocked by that. But from that
day on, they kept asking us because they didn't
You
seem very much to live where a bunch of Germans
were. All we think of when we think of the Nazis are
more like the Gestapo type Nazi. Can you tell me a
little bit about the German people that were there
as German soldiers?
like they felt sorry for my little brother, who was
so small and skinny. And one of the fellows kept
asking him to come up to his room, and he would share
his own lashes with my brother. But then on the
other hand, they were the other breed
And they were very ugly. They wouldn't let us use
our dining room. And the maid would come
downstairs, my mother's maid, and say, well, the
first group of Germans used to give us leftover
soup. Do you have any leftover? Because we need it.
Don't throw it away. And they would say, no, we
don't have any. They would never give us any. And we
would actually see them throw it away.
About
what percentage of the population in your area do
you think were members of the resistance?
You knew about it, but you didn't know
individuals, or did you know the individuals?
We knew them by, we could see them go back and forth,
but we didn't know them by name. There was no such
thing as knowing them by name, you know, because
they were all, you know, people that we never knew
before anyway. Where did they come from? They were
refugees from the northern part, or...?
the professors, they were lawyers,
they
were all kinds of people. And one of the, I think,
most prominent is the one whose family has been
defective
And do you know any people that continued from the
resistance and, like you said, are now continuing
to be prominent?
Well, I've asked some pretty specific questions.
Are there any things that you have, in particular
your feelings about, World War II in general, or
the invasion of the Nazis, or the Jews, anything
that the French did in the resistance. Are there
specific things that you would like to mention?
Well,
it was a pretty grim time, and I was young, and it was
pretty astounding that we had to, you know, it was
wartime, and we knew that the Germans were bad
people, and we We knew that it wouldn't last, but we
had to abide by the curfew. We had to... It was grim
to see that our young men were being taken and sent
over to Germany to make arms, to make more arms, or
that our Jewish people were being persecuted. And
it was really sad times for us. And to see our cities
you know, being invaded by those troops walking up
and down, yelling their songs, military songs. It
was really a chilling experience.
atrocities
they did when they would take a machine gun in some
of the country roads and would see a bunch of little
girls come out of their church in their First
Communion outfits and they would machine gun all
these little girls. Atrocities like this went on
all over France and it was a very bad period. Well, I
think that's about all the questions I have.
Anything else that you'd like to add?
and we had a good sense of humor which helped us, you
know, weather this storm and we were very proud of
our young people. I was very proud of my own brother
because of what he did by concealing and stealing
those weapons and passing them out to the
underground. My mother and I and myself were
extremely surprised after the armistice to be
invited to a very formal ceremony and to see my
little brother step forward and be given a
marvelous shiny medal. We didn't know why the
medal was given to him, simply because he had been
smuggling arms to the underground all these
months.
So
you didn't know at the time that he was doing that?
Well,
I certainly appreciate the interview, and thank
you very much. Let me see. You say there's one more
episode with you and your brother playing tricks
on the Germans?
Well, go ahead.
military marches, troops, and they were
reporting to some kind of a base of activity. And we
could tell them to come regularly. And so we
decided that we would say some tricks on them. And
it was at nighttime, and we knew they were coming
up. And we, my brother and I, went to a street corner
where we knew they were always turning. And we
changed the street sign.
They were marching around and they stopped around
and the officer would flash his flashlight on the
street sign and then he would see, oh, we must go in
that direction and they would all march off into
the wrong direction. And my brother and I would
just giggle and laugh. See, that was a great story.
I would say so. Well,
again, thank you very much for this interview.